Introduction to Machine Learning with Python
28-Feb-2025

ISBN
9781449369415


GitHub
https://github.com/amueller/introduction_to_ml_with_python


What is ML?	blog
ML is akin to training computers to improve tasks without providing detailed instructions. Machines utilize data to learn and enhance the performance without explicit programming and concentrates on creating algorithms for computers to learn from data to improv

Pg. 2
How are ML algorithms categorized?
Supervised Learning
Unsupervised Learning

Pg. 2
Waht is Supervised Learning?
the user provides the algorithm with pairs of
inputs and desired outputs, and the algorithm finds a way to produce the desired output
given an input

Pg. 3
Waht is Unsupervised Learning?
In unsupervised learning, only the input data is known, and no known output
data is given to the algorithm

Pg. 4
What are the components of data used in ML?
[represention of your input data that a computer understans]	
- helpful to treat data as a table
- sample = entity or row in the data
- features = columns / properties that describe the entities


LATER
What is feature extraction?
What is feature engineering?


Pg. 5
Why is Python the lingua franca for ML?
It combines
the power of general-purpose programming languages with the ease of use of
domain-specific scripting languages like MATLAB or R. Python has libraries for data
loading, visualization, statistics, natural language processing, image processing


Pg. 5
What is scikit-learn?
scikit-learn is an open source project	that contains a number of ML algorithms as well as comprehensive documentation about each algorithm

Pg. 7
What are some of the other essential libraries and tools used in ML development?
Jupyter Notebook
an interactive environment for running [Python] code in the browser and useful tool for exploratory data analysis used by data scientists and ML engineers

NumPy
fundamental package for scientific computing in Python with functionality for multidimensional arrays [tables of data]

SciPy
collection of function for scientific computing in Python providing advanced linear algebra routines, mathematical function
optimization, signal processing, special mathematical functions, and statistical distributions

matplotlib
primary scientific plotting library in Python. It provides functions
for making publication-quality visualizations such as line charts, histograms, scatter
plots

pandas
Python library for data wrangling and analysis leveraging DataFrame [table of data] providing range of methods to modify and operate on this table allowing SQL-like queries and table joins